Deprecate ContainerRuntime class (#23331)
microsoft/FluidFramework: .changeset/plain-mails-tan.md

---
"@fluidframework/aqueduct": minor
"@fluidframework/container-runtime": minor
---
---
"section": deprecation
---

The ContainerRuntime class is now deprecated

> The class `ContainerRuntime` is deprecated and will not longer be exported started in version 2.20.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The class `ContainerRuntime` is deprecated and will no longer be exported starting in version 2.20.0.
```

---
"@fluidframework/aqueduct": minor
"@fluidframework/container-runtime": minor
---
---
"section": deprecation
---

The ContainerRuntime class is now deprecated

The class `ContainerRuntime` is deprecated and will no longer be exported starting in version 2.20.0.

There are two possible migration paths to stop using `ContainerRuntime`:

> * When using it as a type, replace it with an interface like `IContainerRuntime` (or in rare cases, `IRuntime`)

Reviewer: Do we have more details on which scenarios would lead to one or the other? If so, would be nice to include here.

Author: Probably could just leave off the `IRuntime` bit.  I think that's only exposed because of `instantiateRuntime` and honestly isn't applicable to any time an app would really have this thing.

Author: ```suggestion
* When using it as a type, replace it with an interface like `IContainerRuntime`
```

* When using the static function `ContainerRuntime.loadRuntime` replace it with the free function `loadContainerRuntime`.

`BaseContainerRuntimeFactory` has some changes as well, since it exposed `ContainerRuntime` in several function signatures:

* `instantiateFirstTime` - Takes the wider type `IContainerRuntime` instead of `ContainerRuntime`
* `instantiateFromExisting` - Takes the wider type `IContainerRuntime` instead of `ContainerRuntime`

> * `preInitialize` - deprecated as well, since it returns `ContainerRuntime`

Reviewer: `BaseContainerRuntimeFactory` is not `@sealed` so right now people could in theory subclass it, and I believe that would make this breaking for anyone that was doing it. I don't know how confident we are that it is not happening today... and if we are confident enough, maybe we should mark it `@sealed`. And well, depending on that level of confidence, these might actually need to wait until 2.20?

Author: Great call-out.  I discussed this at length with @jason-ha, it's technically not a breaking change based on TypeScript weirdness (kind of disappointing), but you're right that it would lead to unexpected behavior if a subclass was counting on getting `ContainerRuntime` and then a caller provided something outside that.

HOWEVER -- in the ecosystem in which this is used, it'll always be `ContainerRuntime`.  We just don't want to talk about it :)
